# Monte-Carlo-Euler-Approx

#1 Project Description

This project uses continuous random sampling of numbers from 0-1 to estimate the value of e. Through conducting multiple trials, and average the amount of numbers it takes for, when summed up, to be more than 1 the approximate value of e is revealed. As we already know, e is approximately 2.71, which means the average should converge to that number. Probability, Calculus, and the Law Of Large Numbers can all be used to explain why this simulation works.

#2 Motivation Eulers number has always been a topic of interest for me. My teachers have always just told me that eulers number is approximately 2.71 and is the base root of the natural log, but never how it is derived, and why eulers number is approximately that specific value. Teachers always explain that pi is the ratio of the circles circumference to its diameter, but whenever I asked about what e is in relation to that, there was always no answer. There is many uses of eulers number, the most common being used in financial compounding, but how could a number this special have no other explanation of what it truly is. Through research, I learned about the Golden Ratio, and the very basis of what this project is about. Eulers number is also the average amount of numbers it takes for random numbers from 0-1 when summed together be greater than one. I knew I needed to test this out using the Monte Carlo method, and explore more about what this number could do.

#3 Commonly known formula for e Before getting into the code, the general definition of e needs to be explained. It is described as the lim as x goes to infinity of (1+1/x)^x. This formula is used to calculate compound interest etc, and intuitevely you may think this equals to 1, as the limit as x goes to infinity of 1/x is 0, and 1 ^ infinity you would think is intuitvely 1. However, this equals e. Through setting y = lim x goes to infitiy (1+1/x)^x you can take the natural log of both sides, making the equation ln(y) = lim x goes to infinity ln(1+1/x)^x. Using the rules of logs, this can be rewrote as xln(1+1/x). L'Hospitals Rule now works, as this can be rewritten as ln(1+1/x)/1/x and the limit as x goes to infinity is undefined, so using L'Hospitals rule and taking the derivative of the numerator and denominator, it is now the limit of x as it goes to infinity of (1/1+x)*(-1/x^2)/(-1/x^2) = 1/(1+(1/x)) and as x goes to infinity that 1/(1+x) is equal to 1. Now, when lny = 1 to find y you have to set e to the power of both which ultimately equals y = e^1 or y = e. This is the standard proof for getting e, and what is commonly taught in schools and education. However, that is not the only way of getting e, in which I will explain through my code, and why program works.

#4 Explaining the code The random library is imported, which allows the program to randomly pick a number from 0 - 1. Trials is the amount of times you want the experiment to be conducted. In the while n < trials loop the experiment is conducted however many times the trials value is, a random number is picked from 0-1 and it is put into the variable total. The number_counter variable gets 1 added to it, and this is the variable that says how many numbers it takes for the sum to be greater than 1. If total is less than 1, then the loop starts again and a different random number is picked. Once the sum exceeds 1, the number_counter value is added to a list, and all the variables reset and the next trial begins. The mean of the list is then taken, which is the approximation for e. #5 Results Trials Approx. e 100 2.77 1000 2.68 10000 2.7019 100000 2.71869 1000000 2.71833

The mathematical approximation of e is 2.71828, and as seen from these results, as the trials gets greater and greater the mean, or the approximation of e, converges to its true value.

#6 Mathematical Foundation for why this project works

a. Initial probabillity statement

This is the true interesting part of this project, how is this project able to approximate to e? Well, this is why. First, you must start with defining a random variable - X. X is the random amount of numbers it takes for the sum to exceed 1 in one specific trial. We are now going to define another variable, n. n is the amount of numbers it takes for the sum to exceed 1. X and n are both different, n is a fixed amount, and it can be 2 numbers, 4 numbers, etc etc while X is random. We then take the probability of the inequality(X >= n) where n=1 all the way up to infinity. The proper notation is ΣP(X>=n) starting from n = 1 to infinity(I am unable to write proper notation on computer, so whenever I say from n=1 to infinity please assume n=1 is on the bottom and infinity is on the top). This gives the average amount of numbers it takes for the sum to exceed 1 because it takes the probability of the experiment lasting from every number. For example, first it takes the probability that X is >= n when n=1, which is always true so the probability is 1. Then, it adds the probability that X >= n when n=2. This is now testing the probability that X takes 2 or more numbers to exceed 1, which again is always true because since the first number has to be from [0,1], it must need atleast another number to exceed one. Next it tests the probability X takes 3 or more numbers to exceed 1, which is not always true. This notation adds up all of these probabilities, which is really just testing the probability the experiment survives after a specified amount of time, and it converges to the average amount of numbers it takes for the sum to exceed 1.

b. Expected Value Explanation

The expected value is implicitly taken while summing up all the probabilities which removes the need to multiply each number by its probability. It is implicitly taken by being implicitly counted through the other probability. For example, take the probability P(X = 1). The expected value for it would be 1 * P(x=1). Now, take P(x=2). The expected value would 2 * P(X = 2). This goes on and on when X = 3,4, etc. When P(X>=n) when n = 1 is taken, that takes the probability that P(X = 1), P(X = 2), so on and adds them all together. The same occurs when P(X>=n) when n=2, P(X=2), P(X=3), P(x=4), so on is all added up. As already seen, there was only one P(X = 1) and 2 P(X = 2) , and they were both used those respective times. Assuming this pattern continues, that means P(X=3) will be added up three times, P(X=4) is added up four times, so on which means the expected value is found through addition instead of multiplication. In other words, whenever X = x the event where X>=n, is seen in all probabilities from n = 1,2...x , meaning that P(X=x) is added x times to the total sum.. This means in the overall sum, x is counted however much its value is, or in otherwords x * P(X=x), which is just its expected value.

c. Redefining the summation formula

Another way to rewrite P(X>= n) is by defining each random variable chosen with the variable Y. That means, if the first random number is 0.2, Y1 = 0.2, if the second is 0.4, Y2 = 0.4. P(X >= n) is actually saying that the amount of random numbers needed is atleast n. That also means that if there is n-1 random numbers chosen, then the result must be less than or equal to 1. That is because if there needs to be atleast n numbers chosen to be greater than 1, that means n-1 is not able to be greater than 1 and has to either be less than or equal to one. Or, in other words, Y1 + Y2 ... + Yn-1 =< 1. Ultimately P(Y1+Y2...+Yn-1 =< 1) is equal to P(X >= n) from n = 1 to infinity. Otherwise, ΣP(X>=n) starting from n = 1 to infinity is equal to ΣP(Y1 + Y2...+Yn-1 =<1) from n=1 to infinity.

d. Geometric interpretation

The trickiest part of the problem comes in when explaining how ΣP(Y1 + Y2...+Yn-1 =<1) from n=1 to infinity is also equal to Σ1/(n-1)! from n=1 to infinity. I will do my best to explain through a geometric interpretation. I will use when n=2 as my first example. When n=2, then n-1 = 1 which can be represented in the 1d plane as a line segment. A random number from [0,1] is chosen in this line segment, and no matter what it will only have 1 coordinate and it will always be less than or equal to 1. This makes the probability 1/1 or 1/1!. When n = 3, then n - 1 = 2 which brings us to the 2D plane, and that means due picking pairs of numbers now, just 2 random numbers, the geometric interpretation of picking two random numbers from [0,1] is a square. Now, the only way for these numbers to be less than or equal to 1, is if both numbers are on the lower left half of the square. More specifically, the region where y + x =1, which is a triangle, which its volume is 1/2, or 1/2!. A better way to envision this is if you have a dart and you are aiming it at a square. Using the assumption the dart goes into the square, and each spot has an equal chance of being chosen, what would the probability be that the coordinates of where your dart landed is less than or equal to 1. The coordinates represent the 2 random numbers that is chosen, and the only way for those two numbers to add to less than or equal to 1 is if you hit the bottom left half of the square. If you envision a 2D triangle inside of the 2D square that splits up the square into 2 pieces, your dart must hit in the 2D triangle, and the probability of that using the volume of a triangle is 1/2. When n = 4 , that means n - 1 = 3, which brings us to the 3D plane and brings us to a cube. Now, there is three coordinates and all of those coordinates have to sum to less than or equal to 1. If we use the dart example again, for it to be less than or equal to 1 you must hit a coordinate where all values sum less than or equal to 1 which is inside the tetrahedron inside the cube. The volume of this tetrahedron is 1/6, or 1/3!. This keeps happening as n gets larger and larger. This can be seen in the equation 1/(n-1)! as the volume of the shape that needs to be hit to satisfy the condition is always the factorial of 1 less than n. The reason this factorial occurs is because when the numbers sum together it makes the shape of a standard simplex, which has a volume of 1/n!. As n increases and increases, the volume of the shape gets smaller and smaller and 1/(n-1)! is how to calculate the probability of getting n - 1 random numbers that do not exceed one. This means thatΣP(X>=n) starting from n = 1 to infinity can be rewritten Σ1/(n-1)! starting from n = 1 to infinity.

e. Shifting formula and Mclaurin Series explanation

Now, you want this to be rewritten as 1/n!, and you are able to do that through reindexing the sum to start from 0, in which that shifts the factorial to start from the 1/n!. Rewritten with the indexing it is Σ1/n! starting from n = 0 to infinity. This ultimately approximates to e and that is known because of the Taylor series. The Taylor series is a way to make approximate equations for irrational numbers, trignometric expression, and etc. through derivatives at a certain point. Basically, the Taylor series allows for expressions to be expressed in the form of an equation at a certain point. The general form for making the taylor series is this: f(x) + f'(x)/1! * (x-a) + f''(x)/2! * (x-a)^2 + f'''(x)/3! * (x-a)^3 + f''''(x)/4! * (x-a)^4.... If you are centering the taylor series around a = 0, then it becomes the Mclaurin Series where f(x) = f(x) + f'(x)/1! + f''(x)/2! + f'''(x)/3! + f''''(x)/4!.... Taking the Mclaurin series of e^x: e^x + e^x/1 + e^x/2 + e^x/6 + e^x/24.... If you want to get the Mclaurin series for e then x must be set equal to 0, and the approximation of 1 + 1 + 1/2 + 1/6 + 1/24.... This approxomation follows the summation of Σ1/n! starting from n = 0 to infinity. This means that the Σ1/n! starting from n = 0 to infinity is equal to e, which otherwise overall means ΣP(X>=n) starting from n = 1 to infinity = e which is why the average amount of random numbers from 0-1 needed to sum to exceed one is equal to e.

f. Law of Large Numbers

This simulation ultimately works better as n increases because of the Law of Large Numbers. This states that as the trials of an experiment increases, the sample mean converges to the actual/population mean. The reasoning for this is because as you perform an experiment a large amount of times, the degree of randomness involved is minimized more and more as it gets closer and closer to the true probability/ true mean.
